---
title: Dwight Hall
id: 9
center: [-72.92930, 41.30894]
---

The first stop is Dwight Hall. Dwight Hall is Yale’s Center for Public
Service and Social Justice. Founded by undergraduates in 1886, Dwight
Hall received its namesake from Timothy Dwight and stands today as the
largest service based organization in the country.

Timothy Dwight served as Yale’s President from 1795 to 1817. Under his
tenure, President Dwight not only transformed education within Yale,
but marked his presence within the city of New Haven, where he “helped
establish an elementary school for Black people, ‘to teach negro
children how to read the Bible.’”

<div class="container right">
  <img src="/images/dwight/3.png"/>
</div>

To Dwight, the white man’s “duty” for justice was to “faithfully”
Christianize those who were brutally enslaved by the older imperial
powers like France and Britain. It comes at no surprise that Dwight
Hall — whose mission is to advance social change in New Haven and
around the world — carries the legacy of Yale’s eighth president.
Understanding the purpose of Dwight Hall’s service work today cannot
be done without disentangling the history of “Christianization” behind
its namesake.

<div class='separator'></div>


Perhaps the story of Ōpūkahaʻia can offer insight. Ōpūkahaʻia enters a
point in American history where missionaries, philanthropists, war
heroes, and educators carefully disguised conquest under a narrative
of benevolence.

In 1809, Timothy Dwight’s relative found Ōpūkahaʻia outside the steps
of Yale, crying because he could not enter the space and access its
knowledge. Nearing the end of his life, Timothy Dwight assumed
authority over his relative’s discovery as his last mission. He took
Ōpūkahaʻia under his tutelage to teach the “backwards”
sixteen-year-old how to read and write in the English language,
starting with the Bible.

Ōpūkahaʻia’s ‘Christianization’ was now a manifestation of justice,
serving as a model for indigenous schooling in the latter half of the
nineteenth century. Ōpūkahaʻia’s story represents the ‘benevolent’
transformation of the “savage-born infant to the surroundings of
civilization...grow[ing] to possess a civilized language and habit.”

<div class="container left">
  <img src="/images/dwight/6.png"/>
</div>

Dwight Hall students used their founding of the organization to
institutionalize missionary work within the City of New Haven. For
instance, within its first twenty years, Dwight Hall launched a “Hope
Mission” project that “reach[ed] out to homeless and alcoholic men."
Described as “a modern rescue, ” the Hope Mission project “gave men a
chance to understand... why so many of them became gangsters.” Not
unlike Timothy Dwight’s act of benevolence, Dwight Hall’s enactment of
“service” and “justice” until the 1960s illustrates a veiling of
conquest as a reduction of chaos and creation of peace.

<div class='separator'></div>

It was not until the height of the Civil Rights Movement that Dwight
Hall transitioned to “welcom[ing] socially minded activists of any
faith or non- faith.” Dwight Hall’s programming continued to reanimate
its colonial past. Pivots to secular service at the Hall undergird the
university’s negligence to New Haven; administrators point to the
presence of service across the city as Yale’s ‘investments’ in the
community, forgoing its larger material debt to the city.

Today, Dwight Hall continues to tout its position through selective
callings of its history, such as its participation in housing
protesters in the May Day Strike. But it is difficult to imagine this
transition as one of genuinity when its longer complicity in
paternalistic and tutelary colonialism remains. Indeed, the history
reveals that pursuits of service and justice continue to subscribe to
its initial vision of “empowerment,” prescribing solutions to the
community they viewed as in need of ‘change’ and ‘help.’ The imperial
“will-to-know” is perverted into an equally imperial “will-to-help.”

This is not to say that students at Dwight Hall— or others engaged in
‘public service’— are wholly ‘objects’ of the university, always at
Yale’s will. Patrick Liu, a student involved in providing clinical
services at the Yale Law School, refuses to blindly follow the
institution’s history in his justice work:

> I have personally seen clients that I’ve worked with barely escape a
> devastating encounter with the criminal justice system only to
> return to spaces that are under-resourced, highly policed... Even
> when we provide help, we are setting up our clients to fail.

His critical confrontation with perverted notions of justice allows
him to imagine justice beyond the predatory “will-to-help.” In order
to forge resistance, one must know what is being resisted. Alternative
relationships between the institution and the city are possible, but
reaching them necessitates a reckoning with the existing
relationship(s) of exploitation.

<div class="container">
  <img src="/images/dwight/2.png"/>
</div>
