---
title: The House
simple: house
id: 2
image: null
image_alt: null
center: [-72.9329127653582, 41.30944976850142]
---

<img src="/images/house.jpg" />

The Afro American Cultural Center, colloquially known as
["The House,"](https://afam.yalecollege.yale.edu/about-house/history)
is the first of the four cultural centers we have here at Yale.
Established in 1969 as \"Afro-America,\" the House was born out of the
efforts of the Black Students Alliance at Yale (BSAY). After the House
moved from its original Chapel Street location to its current home
here, the center became a hub for organizers during the New Haven
Black Panther Trials in 1970, when Black Panther co-founder Bobby
Seale and eight other defendants were accused of the murder of
suspected FBI informant Alex Rackley. Yale students housed visiting
Black Panthers throughout the Trials, and students and faculty called
for a strike—a suspension of academic priorities—so they could support
local activism. The President at the time, Kingman Brewster, Jr.,
agreed, declaring famously that he himself was \"skeptical of the
ability of black revolutionaries to achieve a fair trial anywhere in
the United States.\" The President also kept Yale's gates open
[throughout the Trials](https://news.yale.edu/2018/06/13/yale-panelists-recall-may-day-rally-transformed-campus-and-history)
to the over 40,000 protesters who converged in the city. The Trials
were a historical moment in which political power was built through
shared struggles and collaborations between Black Yale students, Black
New Haven residents, and Black Americans at large.
