---
title: Pauli Murray College
id: 12
author: Juma Sei and Sasha Lee
center: [-72.92534, 41.31577]
---

In 2008, the Yale Corporation elected to build a pair of new
residential colleges near Science Hill. Beyond the implications
carried with moderately expanding Yale’s intimate class sizes, the
University faced another challenge as the year wore on: what would
they call the new additions? By the time President Peter Salovey
announced the University’s decision in April of 2016, Yale’s famed
residential college system was already under fire for his re-affirmed
refusal to rename Calhoun College.

A graduate from Yale’s class of 1804, the College’s namesake—John
Caldwell Calhoun—served as a U.S. senator, the nation’s 7th vice
president, secretary of state, and secretary of war. The infamous
white southerner is also known for his unyielding belief in slavery as
a “positive good” in the United States. While they recognized the
College’s disturbing context, those in favor of keeping “Calhoun”
College thought that yielding to student protests would “whitewash”
history. Naturally, students who were part of the residential college
system had a more intimate relationship with the name; it was
uncomfortable to represent someone so antithetical to the Yale
mission. These factors prompted a similar dilemma for the Yale
Corporation as Salovey introduced the new colleges.

“With racially charged protests sweeping college campuses across the
country, the as-yet- unnamed construction sites... emerged as a litmus
test for Yale’s commitment to diversity: would Yale seize this
opportunity to honor a woman or person of color... or choose another
dead white man as a college namesake?” Yale would do both.

The first college was named after Benjamin Franklin, a condition
placed on the $250 million donation gifted to the University from
billionaire alumni Charles Johnson YC ‘56. The second would adopt the
name of Anna Pauline “Pauli” Murray, ’65 J.S.D., ’79 Hon. D.Div., a
queer Black activist and intersectional feminist. The Franklin-Murray
dichotomy makes one consider the implications of institutionalizing a
legacy far more courageous, powerful and enlightening than the
imperial undercurrents bolstering the University itself.

While the naming of Pauli Murray College is undoubtedly noteworthy, as
it “ represents a departure from the roster of white men whose names
grace the facades of 12 other colleges,” we cannot take this
progressivism at face value. This is best articulated in Professor
Grace Hong’s argument that “the current neoliberal multicultural
moment allows for... the nominal valorization of black feminism as a
way to deflect charges of racism and misogyny, which does not preclude
and in many instances facilitates the exclusion and extinguishing of
black feminists.” Extrapolating further, Hong notes how “within the
context of the contemporary university where ‘diversity’ is
tokenistically but not substantively prioritized,” racialized and
gendered management in tandem with this form of “valorization and
fetishization” work to denigrate Black feminism and Black feminists.
Unfortunately, Murray’s nominal valorization was almost immediate.

In a September 2017 article reflecting on the new college’s namesake,
Pauli Murray’s inaugural Head of College wrote, “When I imagine
[Murray], it’s usually not the distinguished legal giant and civil
rights activist, but a scared teenager, a first-gen, a black girl from
Durham, North Carolina, trying to talk her way first into Columbia
University and then into Hunter College.” Although Murray’s
biographical details parallel characteristics of a traditional
first-generation low-income (FGLI) student, the distillation of
Murray’s tenure as a legal giant and civil rights activist into a
stereotyped caricature does little to combat the kind of
representation that Hong warns against. So, is Murray’s inclusion a
genuine indicator of progress or merely deflective valorization?

Answering this query, Professor Crystal Feimster, a tenured Associate
Professor of African American Studies, History and American Studies at
Yale, cautions against false dichotomies. In her words, though Murray
would be “tickled pink” to witness the symbolic significance of “Pauli
Murray” College, “she would not be content.” Murray’s legacy is
contingent on its mobilization. While Feimster notes that coupling
Murray with Benjamin Franklin felt like a deflection and a trade-off,
“the trick is to not let that undermine the moment’s significance.”
Still, she insists, “If [Pauli Murray College] becomes a place to use
the wealth and resources of Yale to the advantage of those that
already have that, then yeah, we have a problem.”
