---
title: Ordinary Spaces
simple: ordinary
id: 13
author: Amy Kim and Jose Garcia
center: [0,0]
---

The final stops are Yale’s ‘ordinary spaces’– common places on campus
that we usually don’t think about as intertwined with the
institution’s imperial legacy. Though taken for granted, these spaces
are in fact very politically and economically charged.

Yale’s ‘ordinary spaces’ are in service to people its empire renders
‘extraordinary.’ When ‘extraordinary’ members of the university (i.e.
students, professors) enter Yale’s dining halls, convenience stores,
and even bathrooms, they are made to think of the spaces as nothing
more or less than ‘in between’ more meaningful destinations. We are
never supposed to be responsible for these spaces. We use their
provisions and move forward.

Ordinary spaces at Yale are structured in a way that ceaselessly
shines on its “aspiring leaders.” These “aspiring leaders” only have
to worry about actualizing the duties of empire– far be it from them
to clean up after themselves when they can be using that time to
‘study.’

**Then who cleans? Who ensures that everything outside ‘study’ is
seamless?**

The light casted on them (us) is not without accompaniment. Even
though the “shine is articulated in ways that hide its shadow,” shine
and shadow co-exist, always. For service workers, performance reviews
evaluate whether employees “appear happy and friendly when interacting
with customers.” If they’re doing their jobs well, they shouldn’t
stand out; the standard of excellence becomes the extent to which
these workers’ labor and personhood are rendered invisible, made into
shadows.

But shadows are not inherent to empire; empire differentiates light
and deems certain areas as darkness, erasing the fact that shadows, as
much as shines, are a product of light. Reorienting and weaponizing
this source of light, however, allows for against itself— to realize
“new ways of being together.” We turn to one of Yale’s many shadows to
disrupt and subvert empire’s division of light.

Imperial history is not without history of resistance. At Yale, the
formation of ordinary space comprises not the absence of resistance,
but its invisibility.

Just this past summer, members of the Local 35 unsettled Yale’s making
of shine and shadow in the broader New Haven community. From this
rupture, hundreds of unionized service and maintenance workers
conceived new possibilities for a relational solidarity. In June of
2020, Local 35 members led more than 500 vehicles in a pro-union car
caravan through one of the university’s most transited and common
spaces: Hillhouse Avenue.

Under the mantra “Yale: Respect New Haven,” union members physically
occupied ordinary space to demand that Yale “support those who have
kept the university running during the pandemic.” More specifically,
they advocated for Yale to meet contract demands by increasing the
number of union jobs and financial contributions to the city’s schools
and homes. These demands were not new nor were they particular to
COVID-19. New Haven residents have long articulated Yale's profound
negligence to the city it occupies. Ann Boyd, lifelong resident of The
Hill, attests to this history and present:

> “The Hill sits in the shadow of Yale...the New Haven Boys and Girls
> Club is [about] to be closed because of financial situations. It
> should not be. I am tired, sick and tired, of not being able to step
> outside my door and seeing young men and young women say, ‘I have a
> job at Yale, it provides me with benefits.’ Yale, step up your game
> and respect New Haven.”

Ann makes clear that university’s shine casts a shadow even outside
its own spaces. Subverting the significance Yale imparts on Hillhouse
— a place where even the President’s Mansion resides — provides an
opportunity to weaponize this ‘shine’ and make the Local 35’s demands
visible, and by extension, dignified and respected.

The tireless organizing, anger, and“unkindness” of agents in Yale’s
ordinary spaces have rebuffed the shadow and brought issues of racism,
income inequality, and labor exploitation to the fore– but how have
particular visibilities moved beyond the moments they were afforded to
“forward a vision

how agents within these spaces relate to one another. Sustaining
movements requires the practice of always asking questions: “how am I
being made by others? What are the consequences of my being on others?
What kinds of sacrifices

Making relational solidarity real begins with these questions and
acknowledgements, but it does not end there. Take the Student Action
and sustain movements”? How are students brought into this larger
project of rupture and subversion? Ordinary spaces train well in
transience, but disrupting these geographies demands confrontation
with are implied in the mythology of myself and being and my
insistence in my individual freedom?” As students in the university,
our task in helping sustain with Workers (SAW) at UNC, Chapel Hill. In
2014, students led a demand that ensured a livable and dignified wage
to workers across the institution. Even if not a ‘probable’
proposition for the institution to take up, the movements is to
recognize that “being is always a being-with, and there is no
existence outside of a co-existence.”

Making relational solidarity real begins with these questions and
acknowledgements, but it does not end there. Take the Student Action
with Workers (SAW) at UNC, Chapel Hill. In 2014, students led a demand
that ensured a livable and dignified wage to workers across the
institution. Even if not a ‘probable’ proposition for the institution
to take up, the ability to see their fighting for better as tied to,
and not separate from, the well-being of workers demonstrates not only
an understanding but an application of our being as a co-existence.
Subverting the university’s shine means that we as students inevitably
rely on it. But must recognize that “the university is not an engine
of social transformation. Activism is.” Activism deeply rooted in and
enacted by a relational solidarity. “New ways of being together” are
possible, and they are possible precisely by embodying coexistence–
relating with, against, and through each other to imagine a future
where integrity, care, and respect for some does not rely on the lack
thereof for others.
