---
title: Dwight Hall
simple: dwight
id: 11
author: Blanca Tallaj and Natalie Troy
center: [-72.92860, 41.31191]
---

> Mission: “Located in New Haven, Connecticut, Yale Law School is one
> of the world’s premier law schools. It offers an unmatched
> environment of excellence and educational intimacy in the form of
> world renowned faculty, small classes, limitless opportunities for
> clinical training, and strong encouragement of public service. The
> Law School is small by design; its impact on the world is measured
> by its accomplished graduates and its ongoing scholarship and
> outreach through numerous centers and projects.”

Founded in part by a New Haven lawyer who led the committee that
successfully opposed a proposed academy in New Haven for freedmen, the
Yale Law School today prides itself on its elite identity. This
eliteness belies its earliest 1800s identity as a struggling trade
school in the expanding US settler colonial empire that would have
gone under at least twice without interventions from the New Haven
bar. In this essay, we examine three key themes in the law school’s
mission statement and explore how the law school’s supposed prestige,
“neutral” excellence, and goodwill mask its imperial ties.

Looming above and apart from downtown New Haven only a few blocks
away, the massive walls shelter the secretive knowledge inside. Just
like Yale College, the YLS only admits around 6-7% of all those who
apply. As made clear in the law school’s mission statement, being (one
of) the best law schools is central to its identity today. Its famous
architecture sets this eliteness into stone. Intricate stone carvings,
elaborate woodwork, and stained glass windows portraying “the main
characters in legal dramas (judges, lawyers, defendants, etc.), scenes
of adjudication and punishment, famous legal figures from cultures
around the world (ranging from King Solomon and Confucius to
Charlemagne), and famous legal scholars” ring its massive stone walls.

The website’s subtle use of the phrase “famous legal scholars” implies
a homogenization of law and justice, as if this building and everyone
who has ever passed through it are the final authority on law in the
world. Being constantly surrounded by such elaborate architecture
reinforces the power that students feel after making it through
admissions to earn their spot inside the law school courtyard. The
lavish funds that the law school puts into renovating and decorating
its old buildings as well as one new one reveal how central the
school’s architecture is to continuing its status. For the YLS, those
who threaten others’ property are the faces of criminality, carved
into the schools’ very walls.

Just like its eye-catching architecture and pipeline of obedient past
graduates into powerful positions, the law school also makes academic
excellence central to its mission. This focus on “excellence” as the
standard for entry into the student body or faculty of the law school
reinforces the institution’s claims to neutrality while actually
upholding the current settler colonial order.

Recapping former YLS Dean Anthony Kronman’s 2019 book The Assault on
American Excellence, Stephens and Kronman ring similar reactionary
alarm bells about how introducing “emotions” and “safe spaces” into
the university to coddle non-White students threatens the
intellectualness of the university.

The title of Bret Stephens’ 2019 New York Times Op- Ed clearly frames
whose epistemologies are inherently un-excellent: “Diversity,
Inclusion, and Anti-Excellence.”

According to this train of thought, any non-Western, white male ways
of knowing are inherently not worthy of the institution’s notice.
Although the law school would argue that its forms of excellence are
objective and neutral (and some slightly more radical ideas and
thinkers can slip through the cracks by proving their own excellence),
Kronman’s knee-jerk reaction to any threats to his institutional power
based in Whiteness and Western epistemologies reveals whose excellence
the law school favors. How do we understand our own “success” within a
university that will inevitably weaponize it against others?

The law school sanitizes its own image while also padding its
students’ resumes through the final emphasized aspect of its mission
statement: its dozens of legal clinics. In these clinics, students
practice law, preparing and arguing cases for free on behalf of real
clients under the supervision of law professors. Through its nearly
thirty clinics, the law school puts its students’ learning and resume
skills as its first priority in choosing clients and setting the
bounds of the work that clinics can do.

Just as the carvings on the outside of the law school cement its
graduates as the final authority on the law across the world, this
so-called humanitarianism gives the institution a way to maintain its
authoritative status while disguising this act as charity. For the law
students, this humanitarianism is an academic exercise, a bullet point
on their resume. This act becomes a sinister one that simply acts as a
way to ensure the continued success of the institution. Just as the
royal family of England occasionally makes large donations in order to
justify their own existence, the YLS must justify its status and
knowledgeable authority by putting that knowledge into practice in the
very community from which it distances itself.

But perhaps there is cause for hope. Within even the smallest
opportunity to change institutions lies the potential to use one’s own
tools for a decolonizing purpose: to become a scyborg. Gerald Torres,
a professor of environmental justice law at the law school leads the
Saginaw-Chippewa Disenrollment Clinic, which is currently “pursuing a
claim against the Department of the Interior under The Judgment Funds
Act on behalf of disenrolled members of the Saginaw Chippewa tribe”.
Professor Torres’ ultimate goal is decolonization, but as a scyborg,
he has weaved this clinic into the structure of the university while
also working outside it. He has created an undercommons where he can
live in the contradictions, “in jazz, in improvisation, in noise”.
